# Introduction to CHOPs Vid Notes

### Importing the image and making adjustments
* Double click the [network](<./Network.md> "Network") and whilst holding shift select a [Movie File In TOP](<./Movie_File_In_TOP.md> "Movie File In TOP"), a [Level TOP](<./Level_TOP.md> "Level TOP"), a [HSV Adjust TOP](<./HSV_Adjust_TOP.md> "HSV Adjust TOP") and then releasing shift select a [Switch TOP](<./Switch_TOP.md> "Switch TOP"). You should now have 4 nodes [wired](<./Wire.md> "Wire") into one another.
  * Selecting the [Movie File In TOP](<./Movie_File_In_TOP.md> "Movie File In TOP"), under the Play tab in its preferences click the plus icon next to the File [parameter](<./Parameter.md> "Parameter") and select butterfly6 from the file browser.
  * Select the [Level TOP](<./Level_TOP.md> "Level TOP") and under the Pre Tab set the Black Level [parameter](<./Parameter.md> "Parameter") to 0.2
  * Select the [HSV Adjust TOP](<./HSV_Adjust_TOP.md> "HSV Adjust TOP") and copy and paste (Ctrl + C, Ctrl + V) the TOP two times. Connect the outputs of these new TOPs to the input of _switch1_.
  * Left click the output of the [Level TOP](<./Level_TOP.md> "Level TOP") and then left click the input of the [Switch TOP](<./Switch_TOP.md> "Switch TOP") to [wire](<./Wire.md> "Wire") the _level1_ into the _switch1_.
  * Select the first [HSV Adjust TOP](<./HSV_Adjust_TOP.md> "HSV Adjust TOP") and under the HSV Tweak tab set the Hue Offset parameter to -25.
  * Set the second [HSV Adjust TOPs](<./HSV_Adjust_TOP.md> "HSV Adjust TOP") Hue Offset parameter to 50 and the third [HSV Adjust TOPs](<./HSV_Adjust_TOP.md> "HSV Adjust TOP") to 200.

### Setting Up The [Switch TOP](<./Switch_TOP.md> "Switch TOP")
* The [Switch TOP](<./Switch_TOP.md> "Switch TOP") will now have four inputs. The initial image unedited and the three adjusted images each with their own hue offset. You can test this by seeing if the colors change when you click the [Switch TOP](<./Switch_TOP.md> "Switch TOP") and then drag the Index parameter slider to the right. The number in the index parameter represents the inputs number. For example the first input is the image with a hue offset of -25 since the last image that was [wired](<./Wire.md> "Wire") in was the unedited image with no hue offset.
  * Set the [Switch TOPs](<./Switch_TOP.md> "Switch TOP") image parameter to 4. The image in the [Switch TOPs](<./Switch_TOP.md> "Switch TOP") [viewer](<./Viewer.md> "Viewer") should now be the same as the image in the [Level TOPs](<./Level_TOP.md> "Level TOP") [viewer](<./Viewer.md> "Viewer").
  * Turn the Blend Inputs check box in the [Switch TOP](<./Switch_TOP.md> "Switch TOP") on.

### Setting [CHOPs](<./CHOP.md> "CHOP") to drive parameters
* Double click above the [TOPs](<./TOP.md> "TOP") in your [network](<./Network.md> "Network") and whilst holding shift under the [CHOPs](<./CHOP.md> "CHOP") tab select a [LFO CHOP](<./LFO_CHOP.md> "LFO CHOP") and then releasing shift select a [Math CHOP](<./Math_CHOP.md> "Math CHOP").
  * [CHOPs](<./CHOP.md> "CHOP") are [generators](<./Generator.md> "Generator") and [filters](<./Filter.md> "Filter"). [Generators](<./Generator.md> "Generator") create data, a numerical value changing over time where as [filters](<./Filter.md> "Filter") modify that data. For example take a look at the [LFO CHOPs](<./LFO_CHOP.md> "LFO CHOP") [viewer](<./Viewer.md> "Viewer"). The [LFO CHOP](<./LFO_CHOP.md> "LFO CHOP") is a changing number (sine wave) which moves from -1 to 1 and then back again. The frequency (how quickly the value changes) can be edited within the [parameters](<./Parameter.md> "Parameter") of the [CHOP](<./CHOP.md> "CHOP"). Set the Frequency [parameter](<./Parameter.md> "Parameter") to 0.5. It's also worth noting that in the [OP Create Dialog](<./OP_Create_Dialog.md> "OP Create Dialog") [generators](<./Generator.md> "Generator") are a darker green than [filters](<./Filter.md> "Filter").
  * In order to animate the color of the butterflies you can use the newly created [CHOP](<./CHOP.md> "CHOP") [channel](<./Channel.md> "Channel") (generated in the [LFO CHOP](<./LFO_CHOP.md> "LFO CHOP") and then manipulated using the [Math CHOP](<./Math_CHOP.md> "Math CHOP")) to be the numerical value in our [Switch TOP](<./Switch_TOP.md> "Switch TOP") parameter. The problem is that the numerical value in the [LFO CHOP](<./LFO_CHOP.md> "LFO CHOP") is only -1 to 1 whereas the numerical value needed for the Switch TOP is 0 to 4.
  * Click the [Math CHOP](<./Math_CHOP.md> "Math CHOP") and under the range tab you will see a From and To parameter. This parameter will allow you to change the channels value from -1 to 1 and then to 0 to 4 which would fit the Index [parameter](<./Parameter.md> "Parameter") of the [Switch TOP](<./Switch_TOP.md> "Switch TOP"). Set the From [parameter](<./Parameter.md> "Parameter") as -1 to 1 and the To [parameter](<./Parameter.md> "Parameter") to 0 to 4.
  * To export this value to the [TOP](<./TOP.md> "TOP") first right click the output of the [Math CHOP](<./Math_CHOP.md> "Math CHOP") and select a [Null CHOP](<./Null_CHOP.md> "Null CHOP").
  * Activate the viewer of the [Null CHOP](<./Null_CHOP.md> "Null CHOP") and drag and drop the channel to the [Switch TOPs](<./Switch_TOP.md> "Switch TOP") Index [parameter](<./Parameter.md> "Parameter") until a small plus icon with an arrow appears then let go. Select **Export CHOP** from the pop-up menu that appears. The [parameter](<./Parameter.md> "Parameter") should now be blue and constantly changing value.
  * The butterfly in the [Switch TOPs](<./Switch_TOP.md> "Switch TOP") [viewer](<./Viewer.md> "Viewer") should now be changing color smoothly.

### Overlaying the butterfly onto a black background
* Right click the [Switch TOP](<./Switch_TOP.md> "Switch TOP") and select an [Over TOP](<./Over_TOP.md> "Over TOP").
  * Double click the [network](<./Network.md> "Network") underneath the [Switch TOP](<./Switch_TOP.md> "Switch TOP") and add a [Constant TOP](<./Constant_TOP.md> "Constant TOP").
  * Left click the [Constant TOPs](<./Constant_TOP.md> "Constant TOP") output and then left click the [Over TOPs](<./Over_TOP.md> "Over TOP") second input to [wire](<./Wire.md> "Wire") the [Constant TOP](<./Constant_TOP.md> "Constant TOP") into the [Over TOP](<./Over_TOP.md> "Over TOP").
  * The [Over TOPs](<./Over_TOP.md> "Over TOP") [viewer](<./Viewer.md> "Viewer") should now have a black background with the butterfly changing color.
  * Right click the [Over TOPs](<./Over_TOP.md> "Over TOP") output and select an [Out TOP](<./Out_TOP.md> "Out TOP").

### Switching between manual and automatic
* Remove the export to the Switch CHOP's index parameter by right clicking on the index parameter and selecting **Remove Export** from the menu.
  * Right click the [Math CHOPs](<./Math_CHOP.md> "Math CHOP") output and whilst holding shift select a [Switch CHOP](<./Switch_CHOP.md> "Switch CHOP") then releasing shift select a [Null CHOP](<./Null_CHOP.md> "Null CHOP").
  * Double click below the [Math CHOP](<./Math_CHOP.md> "Math CHOP") and select a [Constant CHOP](<./Constant_CHOP.md> "Constant CHOP").
  * Select the [Constant CHOPs](<./Constant_CHOP.md> "Constant CHOP") output and [wire](<./Wire.md> "Wire") it into the [[Switch CHOP]s input.
  * Select the [Null CHOP](<./Null_CHOP.md> "Null CHOP") which you created alongside the [Switch CHOP](<./Switch_CHOP.md> "Switch CHOP") and export the [Null CHOP](<./Null_CHOP.md> "Null CHOP") to the [Switch TOPs](<./Switch_TOP.md> "Switch TOP") index parameter like before.
  * Your [Switch CHOP](<./Switch_CHOP.md> "Switch CHOP") can now change between two values. The ever changing LFO value and the Constant value which you can set within the [Constant CHOPs](<./Constant_CHOP.md> "Constant CHOP") [parameters](</index.php?title=Parameters&action=edit&redlink=1> "Parameters \(page does not exist\)"). To switch between the two you can change the [Switch CHOPs](<./Switch_CHOP.md> "Switch CHOP") Index [parameter](<./Parameter.md> "Parameter") to 0 or 1.

### Creating a [Button COMP](<./Button_COMP.md> "Button COMP") to switch between manual and automatic
* Double click the [network](<./Network.md> "Network") above the [Switch CHOP](<./Switch_CHOP.md> "Switch CHOP") and whilst holding shift, select under the [COMP](<./Component.md> "Component") tab a [Button COMP](<./Button_COMP.md> "Button COMP") and then releasing shift switch to the [CHOP](<./CHOP.md> "CHOP") tab and select a [Null CHOP](<./Null_CHOP.md> "Null CHOP").
  * Right click the [Null CHOP](<./Null_CHOP.md> "Null CHOP") and export this [Null CHOP](<./Null_CHOP.md> "Null CHOP") too but rather than to the [Switch TOP](<./Switch_TOP.md> "Switch TOP") export it to the [Switch CHOP](<./Switch_CHOP.md> "Switch CHOP") instead.
  * Zoom out of the [network](<./Network.md> "Network") until you are viewing Project1. Under the Layout tab on Project1 change the Width to 400 and the Height to 400.
  * At the top left of the screen above the [network](<./Network.md> "Network") editor there is a small ^ icon. Click it to go into [Perform Mode](<./Perform_Mode.md> "Perform Mode"). Press the Escape key to close [Perform Mode](<./Perform_Mode.md> "Perform Mode"). As you press the button the butterfly will change color and then stop when the button is pressed again.
